kadācana vrajaśiśubhi: samaṃ bhavān
vanāśane vihitamati: pragetarām |
samāvṛto bahutaravatsamaṇḍalai:
satemanairniragamadīśa jemanai: ||1||
kadācana	once
vrajaśiśubhi: samaṃ	along with the children of Gokul
bhavān vana-aśane	Thou, eating in the woods (picnic)
vihita-mati:	making up the mind
pragetarām samāvṛta:	early in the morning surrounded by
bahutara-vatsa-maṇḍalai:	many herds of calves
satemanai:-niragamat-	with eatables set out
īśa jemanai:	O Lord! (also taking along) cooked rice
Once Thou decided to have a picnic in the woods. Along with the children of Gokul and surrounded by a large herd of calves, Thou set out early in the morning. O Lord Thou also took along eatables, cooked rice and other delicacies.
viniryatastava caraṇāmbujadvayā-
dudañcitaṃ tribhuvanapāvanaṃ raja: |
maharṣaya: pulakadharai: kalebarai-
rudūhire dhṛtabhavadīkṣaṇotsavā: ||2||
viniryata: tava	Thy having set out
caraṇa-ambuja-dvayāt-	from Thy two lotus like feet
udañcitaṃ	risen up
tribhuvana-pāvanaṃ raja:	(that which) sanctifies the three worlds, dust
maharṣaya: pulakadharai:	the great sages with horripilation
kalebarai:-udūhire	on their bodies received
dhṛta-bhavat-īkṣaṇa-	holding Thy sight
utsavā:	as celebration
When Thou set out for the woods, from Thy lotus like two feet the dust arose which sanctifies the three worlds. The great sages received that dust on their bodies with great joy and horripilation as they feasted their eyes on Thy sight.
pracārayatyaviralaśādvale tale
paśūn vibho bhavati samaṃ kumārakai: |
aghāsuro nyaruṇadaghāya vartanī
bhayānaka: sapadi śayānakākṛti: ||3||
pracārayati-	grazing
avirala-śādvale tale	on the thick grass land
paśūn vibho	the cattle, O Lord!
bhavati samaṃ kumārakai:	Thee with the lads
aghāsura: nyaruṇat-	Aghaasura blocked
aghāya vartanī	for an evil deed the path
bhayānaka: sapadi	most terrifying, suddenly
śayānaka-ākṛti:	in a python form
Thou and the lads were grazing the cattle on the thick grass lands. Suddenly the most terrifying demon Aghaasura, in the form of a formidable python, with an evil intention blocked the way.
mahācalapratimatanorguhānibha-
prasāritaprathitamukhasya kānane |
mukhodaraṃ viharaṇakautukādgatā:
kumārakā: kimapi vidūrage tvayi ||4||
mahācala-pratima-tano:-	with a mountain like body
guhā-nibha-prasārita-	cave like spread out
prathita-mukhasya	extended mouth
kānane	in the forest
mukha-udaraṃ	in the mouth cavity
viharaṇa-kautukāt-	to explore in eagerness
gatā: kumārakā:	entered the lads
kim-api	(when) somewhat
vidūrage tvayi	ahead had gone, Thee
Thou had gone a little ahead. The lads mistook the huge body of the Asura for a mountain and its large spread out mouth for a cave. In their eagerness to explore the woods, they entered the python's open mouth.
pramādata: praviśati pannagodaraṃ
kvathattanau paśupakule savātsake |
vidannidaṃ tvamapi viveśitha prabho
suhṛjjanaṃ viśaraṇamāśu rakṣitum ||5||
pramādata: praviśati	by mistake, had entered
pannaga-udaraṃ	the snake's belly
kvathat-tanau	(they) felt heat on their bodies
paśupakule savātsake	the Gopa boys along with the calves
vidan-idam tvam-api	knowing this, Thou also
viveśitha prabho	entered O Lord!
suhṛt-janaṃ	the friend folk
viśaraṇam-	who were helpless
āśu rakṣitum	immediately to save
The Gopa boys along with the calves had entered the belly of the snake by mistake and started to feel the heat therein. O Lord! Apprehending the situation, Thou also entered immediately to save the helpless friends.
galodare vipulitavarṣmaṇā tvayā
mahorage luṭhati niruddhamārute |
drutaṃ bhavān vidalitakaṇṭhamaṇḍalo
vimocayan paśupapaśūn viniryayau ||6||
gala-udare	in the throat's cavity
vipulita-varṣmaṇā	with (Thy) increased body
tvayā	by Thee
mahorage luṭhati	(when) the python was wreathing
niruddha-mārute	because of the obstruction of the breath
drutaṃ bhavān	quickly Thou
vidalita-kaṇṭha-maṇḍala:	tearing asunder the neck portion
vimocayan paśupa-paśūn	released the Gopa boys and the calves
viniryayau	and came out
In the cavity of the throat of the python, Thou increased Thy size of Thy body, thus obstructing its breath. It began to wreath in agony, then Thou tore open its neck portion and releasing the Gopa boys and the calves, Thou also came out.
kṣaṇaṃ divi tvadupagamārthamāsthitaṃ
mahāsuraprabhavamaho maho mahat |
vinirgate tvayi tu nilīnamañjasā
nabha:sthale nanṛturatho jagu: surā: ||7||
kṣaṇaṃ divi	for an instant, in the sky
tvat-upagama-artham-āsthitaṃ	Thy emergence awaiting
mahā-asura-prabhavam-	from the great Asura emerging
aho maha: mahat	Oh! A brilliance great
vinirgate tvayi tu	came out as Thou
nilīnam-añjasā	merged immediately (into Thee only)
nabha:-sthale	in the skies
nanṛtu:-atha:	danced and then
jagu: surā:	sang the gods
A great brilliance emerged from the Asura and rose, in the sky and awaited Thy emerging from the body of the python. Oh! What a wonder, as soon as Thou came out the brilliance merged into Thee, while the gods danced and sang.
savismayai: kamalabhavādibhi: surai-
ranudrutastadanu gata: kumārakai: |
dine punastaruṇadaśāmupeyuṣi
svakairbhavānatanuta bhojanotsavam ||8||
savismayai:	wonderstruck
kamalabhava-ādibhi:	Brahamaa and other
surai:-anudruta:	gods (watching and) following (Thee)
tadanu gata:	after that (Thou) went
kumārakai: dine puna:-	with the Gopa boys (when) the day again
taruṇa-daśām-upeyuṣi	youthful state attained (it became noon)
svakai: bhavān-	with (Thy) own people Thou
atanuta bhojana-utsavam	carried out the food celebration (picnic lunch)
Brahmaa and other gods were wonderstruck and watched Thee and followed Thee in the skies. After that Thou went with the Gopa boys when the day had reached noontime and with Thy own people Thou celebrated the food festival, the picnic lunch.
viṣāṇikāmapi muralīṃ nitambake
niveśayan kabaladhara: karāmbuje |
prahāsayan kalavacanai: kumārakān
bubhojitha tridaśagaṇairmudā nuta: ||9||
viṣāṇikām-api	the horn and also
muralīṃ nitambake	the flute, in the waist band
niveśayan	tucking
kabaladhara: karāmbuje	a ball of rice holding in the lotus like hand
prahāsayan	making (them) laugh
kalavacanai:	by humorous talks
kumārakān bubhojitha	the boys, (Thou) ate
tridaśagaṇai:	by the gods
mudā nuta:	joyfully praised
The horn and the flute were tucked in Thy waist band. Thou were holding a ball of rice in Thy lotus like hand and provoked peals of laughter among the boys by Thy humorous talks. As Thou took Thy meal the gods joyfully sang Thy praises.
sukhāśanaṃ tviha tava gopamaṇḍale
makhāśanāt priyamiva devamaṇḍale |
iti stutastridaśavarairjagatpate
marutpurīnilaya gadāt prapāhi mām ||10||
sukha-aśanam tu -iha	the happy meal indeed here
tava gopa-maṇḍale	to Thee amidst the Gopas
makha-aśanāt	than the offerings of the sacrifices
priyam-iva	is more pleasing
deva-maṇḍale	amidst the gods
iti stuta:-tridaśavarai:-	thus praised by the great gods
jagatpate	O Lord of the universe!
marutpurīnilaya	residing in Guruvaayur
gadāt prapāhi mām	from ailments save me
O Lord of the Universe! The great gods praised Thee saying that the meal taken happily with the Gopa boys gave Thee more pleasure than the sacrificial offerings which Thou had received with the gods. O Thou Residing in Guruvaayur! Save me from my ailments.